Edit 2020 Capabilities chapter (#1492)
HTTPArchive/almanac.httparchive.org: src/content/en/2020/capabilities.md

## Async Clipboard API

With the help of the `document.execCommand()` method, websites could already access the user's clipboard. However, this approach is somewhat restricted, as the API is synchronous (making it difficult to process clipboard items), and it can only interact with selected text in the DOM. This is where the [Async Clipboard API](https://webkit.org/blog/10855/async-clipboard-api/) ([W3C Working Draft](https://www.w3.org/TR/clipboard-apis/#async-clipboard-api)) comes in. This new API is not only asynchronous, meaning it doesn't block the page for large chunks of data or waiting for a permission to be granted, but it also allows for images to be copied to or pasted from the clipboard in supported browsers such as Chrome, Edge, and Safari.

### Read Access

> {# TODO(author): Are there any "privacy reasons" we can cite/link here? #}
> The Async Clipboard API provides two methods for reading content from the clipboard: a shorthand method for plain text, called `navigator.clipboard.readText()`, and a method for arbitrary data, called `navigator.clipboard.read()`. Currently, most browsers only support HTML content and PNG images as additional data formats. Due to privacy reasons, reading from the clipboard always requires the user's consent.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Async Clipboard API provides two methods for reading content from the clipboard: a shorthand method for plain text, called `navigator.clipboard.readText()`, and a method for arbitrary data, called `navigator.clipboard.read()`. Currently, most browsers only support HTML content and PNG images as additional data formats. As the clipboard may contain sensitive data, reading from it requires the user's consent.
```

I could give this example here, don't really have something to cite or link to.

Thanks to the [StorageManager API](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/StorageManager), which is part of the [WHATWG Storage Living Standard](https://storage.spec.whatwg.org/#storagemanager), browsers no longer behave like a black box in that regard. This API allows developers to estimate the remaining space available and opt-in to [persistent storage](https://web.dev/persistent-storage/), meaning that the browser will not clear a website's data when disk space is low. Therefore, the API introduces a new `StorageManager` interface on the `navigator` object, currently available on Chrome, Edge, and Firefox.

### Estimate the available storage

Developers can estimate the available storage by calling `navigator.storage.estimate()`. This method returns a promise resolving to an object with two properties: `usage` shows the number of bytes used by the application and `quota` contains the maximum number of bytes available.

{{ figure_markup(
  image="storage_manager_api_estimate.png",

>   alt="Number of pages using the estimate method of the StorageManager API",
>   caption="Number of pages using the estimate method of the StorageManager API.",

Reviewer 2: We don't need an alt and a caption if they are the same

```suggestion
  caption="Number of pages using the estimate method of the StorageManager API.",
```

### Opt-in to persistent storage

There are two categories of web storage: "Best Effort" and "Persistent", with the first being the default. When a device is low on storage, the browser automatically tries to free up best effort storage. For instance, Firefox and Chromium-based browsers evict storage from the least recently used origins. This, however, poses a risk of losing critical data. To prevent eviction, developers can opt for persistent storage. In this case, the browser will not clear the storage, even when space is low. Users can still choose to clear up the storage manually. To opt for persistent storage, developers need to call the `navigator.storage.persist()` method. Depending on the browser and site engagement, a permission prompt may show, or the request will automatically be accepted or denied.

{{ figure_markup(
  image="storage_manager_api_persist.png",

>   alt="Number of pages using the persist method of the StorageManager API",
>   caption="Number of pages using the persist method of the StorageManager API.",

Reviewer 2: Ditto

```suggestion
  caption="Number of pages using the persist method of the StorageManager API.",
```

The `navigator.wakeLock.request()` method creates a wake lock. This method takes a `WakeLockType` parameter. In the future, the Wake Lock API could provide other lock types, such as turning the screen off, but keeping the CPU on. For now, the API only supports screen locks, so there is just one optional argument with the default value of `'screen'`. The method returns a promise that resolves to a `WakeLockSentinel` object. Developers need to store this reference to call its `release()` method and release the screen wake lock later on. The browser will automatically release the lock when the tab is inactive, or the user minimizes the window. Also, the browser may deny a request and reject the promise, for example due to low battery.

{{ figure_markup(
  image="screen_wake_lock_api.png",

>   alt="Number of pages using Screen Wake Lock API",

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

For consistency

});
```

At the time of this writing, only Chromium-based browsers implement this API. On these browsers, the application has to be installed first (i.e., added to the homescreen) before the API can be used. The [site engagement score](https://www.chromium.org/developers/design-documents/site-engagement) of the website defines if and how often periodic sync events can be invoked. In the current conservative implementation, websites can sync content once a day.

{{ figure_markup(
  image="periodic_background_sync_api.png",

>   alt="Number of pages using Periodic Background Sync API",
>   caption="Number of pages using Periodic Background Sync API.",

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  caption="Number of pages using Periodic Background Sync API.",
```

{{ figure_markup(
  image="get_installed_related_apps.png",
  caption="Number of pages using getInstalledRelatedApps().",
  description="Chart of getInstalledRelatedApps() usage, based on the number of pages monitored by HTTPArchive. It compares the usage on mobile and desktop devices. It shows a steady growth for mobile devices, peaking at 363 pages in October 2020 compared to 44 desktop pages.",
  chart_url="https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/e/2PACX-1vTxqot9ALgxcgOVJntkzIKnkpo3idIPy-tL0t_nzC5BwFuq0ThgK5OXOYVVOpama4vB2EyggX813d33/pubchart?oid=1774881171&format=interactive",
  sheets_gid="860146688",
  sql_file="get_installed_related_apps_usage.sql"
  )
}}

> {# TODO(author): Consider rephrasing "strictly monotone growth". #}
> Over the course of 2020, the `getInstalledRelatedApps()` API shows a strictly monotone growth on mobile websites. In October, 363 mobile pages tracked by the HTTP Archive made use of this API. On desktop pages, the API does not grow quite as fast. This could also be due to Android stores currently providing significantly more apps than the Microsoft Store does for Windows.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Over the course of 2020, the `getInstalledRelatedApps()` API shows a steady growth on mobile websites. In October, 363 mobile pages tracked by the HTTP Archive made use of this API. On desktop pages, the API does not grow quite as fast. This could also be due to Android stores currently providing significantly more apps than the Microsoft Store does for Windows.
```

{{ figure_markup(
  image="get_installed_related_apps.png",

>   alt="Number of pages using getInstalledRelatedApps()",
>   caption="Number of pages using getInstalledRelatedApps().",

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  caption="Number of pages using getInstalledRelatedApps().",
```

  chart_url="https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/e/2PACX-1vTxqot9ALgxcgOVJntkzIKnkpo3idIPy-tL0t_nzC5BwFuq0ThgK5OXOYVVOpama4vB2EyggX813d33/pubchart?oid=1571330893&format=interactive",
  sheets_gid="708893754"
  )
}}

The use of the interface is currently still so low that it's hardly measurable. In October 2020, it has increased strongly and is now used during 0.00089% of page loads in Chrome.

## Conclusion

The state of web capabilities in 2020 is healthy, as new, powerful APIs regularly ship with new releases of Chromium-based browsers. Some interfaces like the Content Indexing API or Idle Detection API help to add finishing touches to certain web applications. Other APIs, such as the File System Access and Async Clipboard API, allow a whole new application category, namely productivity apps, to finally fully make the shift to the web. Some APIs such as Async Clipboard and Web Share API have already made their way into other, non-Chromium browsers. Safari even was the first mobile browser to implement the Web Share API.

> {# TODO(author): PTAL at the last sentence, rephrased for clarity. It's your closing statement so I want to make sure I'm not changing your meaning. #}

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

Excellent!
